Engineering Hiring Process @ RS (#88)
rootstrap/blog: content/Engineering Hiring Process.md

# The Engineering Hiring Process at Rootstrap

> To be globally recognized digital masters, that’s our vision at Rootstrap. And we are convinced that in order to get there we should hire the right people, those that will help us create remarkable products, offer a premium service and will make of our office a creative and relaxed environment to work in.

Reviewer: To be globally recognized digital masters, that’s our vision at Rootstrap. And we are convinced that to get there we should hire the right people, those that will help us create remarkable products, offer a premium service and will make our office a creative and relaxed environment to work in.

> To be globally recognized digital masters, that’s our vision at Rootstrap. And we are convinced that in order to get there we should hire the right people, those that will help us create remarkable products, offer a premium service and will make of our office a creative and relaxed environment to work in.

Reviewer: To be globally recognized digital masters, that’s our vision at Rootstrap. And we are convinced that to get there we should hire the right people, those that will help us create remarkable products, offer a premium service and will make our office a creative and relaxed environment to work in.

> To be globally recognized digital masters, that’s our vision at Rootstrap. And we are convinced that in order to get there we should hire the right people, those that will help us create remarkable products, offer a premium service and will make of our office a creative and relaxed environment to work in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be globally recognized digital masters, that’s our vision at Rootstrap. And we are convinced that to get there we should hire the right people, those that will help us create remarkable products, offer a premium service and will make our office a creative and relaxed environment to work in.
```

> At Rootstrap, we believe that having a hiring process in place is the ultimate tool to help your organization find the perfect candidates to become part of your team. It should help detect those people who would fit not just technically but also those who despite having different personalities would contribute to the company's culture and diversity. That’s why everything starts with the hiring process.

Author: ```suggestion
At Rootstrap, we believe that having a hiring process in place is the ultimate tool to help your organization find the perfect candidates to become part of your team. It should help detect those people who would fit not just technically but also those who despite having different personalities would contribute to the company's culture and diversity. That’s why everything starts with the hiring proces.
```

> At Rootstrap, we believe that having a hiring process in place is the ultimate tool to help your organization find the perfect candidates to become part of your team. It should help detect those people who would fit not just technically but also those who despite having different personalities would contribute to the company's culture and diversity. That’s why everything starts with the hiring process.

Author: ```suggestion
At Rootstrap, we believe that having a hiring process in place is the ultimate tool to help your organization find the perfect candidates to become part of your team. It should help detect those people who would fit not just technically but also those who despite having different personalities would contribute to the company's culture and diversity. That’s why everything starts with the hiring proces.
```

> At Rootstrap, we believe that having a hiring process in place is the ultimate tool to help your organization find the perfect candidates to become part of your team. It should help detect those people who would fit not just technically but also those who despite having different personalities would contribute to the company's culture and diversity. That’s why everything starts with the hiring process.

Author: ```suggestion
At Rootstrap, we beliee that having a hiring process in place is the ultimate tool to help your organization find the perfect candidates to become part of your team. It should help detect those people who would fit not just technically but also those who despite having different personalities would contribute to the company's culture and diversity. That’s why everything starts with the hiring process.
```

> At Rootstrap, we believe that having a hiring process in place is the ultimate tool to help your organization find the perfect candidates to become part of your team. It should help detect those people who would fit not just technically but also those who despite having different personalities would contribute to the company's culture and diversity. That’s why everything starts with the hiring process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Rootstrap, we believe that having a hiring process strategy in place is the ultimate tool to help your organization find the perfect candidates. It should help detect those applicants who would fit, not just cause of their skill set but also for their soft skills that can contribute to the company's culture and diversity. We believe everything really does start with a thoughtful hiring process. 
```

## How We Organize

> We have a hiring team of about 14 people, between HR analysts and engineers. Among the engineers, we divide ourselves depending on the technologies we specialize in. The team meets on a monthly basis and we cover subjects such as upcoming job postings, new exercises for the technical part of the interview, and in general to see what we are doing right and the things we should improve. 

Author: ```suggestion
We have a hiring team of about 14 people, between HR analysts and engineers. Among the engineers, we divide ourselves depending on the technologies we specialize in. The team meets on a monthly basis and we cover subjects such as upcoming job postings, new exercises for the technical part of the interview, and in general to see what we are doing right and the things we should. 
```

> We have a hiring team of about 14 people, between HR analysts and engineers. Among the engineers, we divide ourselves depending on the technologies we specialize in. The team meets on a monthly basis and we cover subjects such as upcoming job postings, new exercises for the technical part of the interview, and in general to see what we are doing right and the things we should improve. 

Author: ```suggestion
We have a hiring team of about 14 people, between HR analysts and engineers. Among the engineers, we divide ourselves depending on the technologies we specialize in. The team meets on a monthly basis and we cover subjects such as upcoming job postings, new exercises for the technical part of the interview, and in general to see what we are doing right and the things we should. 
```

> We have a hiring team of about 14 people, between HR analysts and engineers. Among the engineers, we divide ourselves depending on the technologies we specialize in. The team meets on a monthly basis and we cover subjects such as upcoming job postings, new exercises for the technical part of the interview, and in general to see what we are doing right and the things we should improve. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have a hiring team of about 14 people, consisting of HR analysts and engineers. Among the engineers, we divide ourselves depending on the technologies we specialize in. The team meets on a monthly basis, and we discuss upcoming job postings, new interview exercises, and review hiring process performance to identify areas for improvement. 
```

> We see each member of this team as an ambassador to Rootstrap. Someone that can make the interviewee feel comfortable through the interview despite how nerve-wracking a process like this can be, and someone that can clearly convey Rootstrap’s culture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We see each member of this team as a Rootstrap brand ambassador. Someone that can make the candidate feel comfortable through the interview despite how nervous they may be, and someone that can clearly convey Rootstrap’s culture.
```

## Process

> We’re going to focus on explaining how we implement this process here at Rootstrap: how it looks like, what are the steps, which areas of the company participate in each of those steps, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’re going to focus on explaining how we implement our process here at Rootstrap: we will share our step by step guide and which departments of the company participate in the process, etc.
```

> We have four main steps. Though this may seem quite long, it’s not, a normal flow should take not much longer than 10 days. We try to maximize the interviewee’s experience while getting the most in terms of quality and information from these instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have four main steps. Though this may seem quite long, it’s not, a normal flow should not take much longer than 10 days. We try to maximize the interviewee’s experience while still getting the most out of it in terms of quality and information.
```

![Our Hiring Steps](images/hiring-steps.jpg)

### Step 0: Getting the candidates

> Even though we are a services company, our main goal with hiring is getting talent. We obviously have project requirements, a sales pipeline, and a bench for each technology we work with, but we make an effort to not be reactive to those demands and focus on finding the people who would continue making Rootstrap a better company.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though we are a service company, our main goal of hiring is getting talent. We obviously have project requirements, a sales pipeline, and a bench for each technology we work with, but we make an effort to not be distracted by those demands and focus on finding the people who will continue helping Rootstrap grow.
```

Also, it’s very important to note that when we say we want someone who would fit in Rootstrap, we are not saying they have to fit a certain mold. We look for a diversity of profiles, we want a variety of personalities and backgrounds, because diverse teams are strong teams, and different people bring different perspectives to the table. We wouldn’t have gone this far as a company if all of us thought and behaved the same way.

So, there are basically three different ways of getting candidates into the process: 

They find us: Through articles, flyers, or posts on dedicated hiring sites where we ask for developers, designers, product owners, etc. 

> We find them: Using sites like LinkedIn we target specific roles or abilities that the company needs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We find them: Using sites like LinkedIn we target specific roles or skills that the company needs. 
```

> Referrals: This is one of the best ways of contact between the candidate and the company. Not only is it a good indicator of your employees’ happiness with their job (they are probably not going to recommend a place to work if they are not comfortable with their own situation), but also people generally present candidates that are going to fit well inside the company's ecosystem.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Referrals: This is one of the best ways of contact between the candidate and the company. Not only is it a good indicator of your employees’ happiness with their job (they are probably not going to recommend a place to work if they aren't content), but also favorable cause employees generally recommend candidates that are a good fit. 
```

These three different approaches lead to the same point, once we finish with step 0 we get a candidate, and we are ready to start our interview process.

![How We Find Candidates](images/finding-candidates.jpg)

### Step 1: Human Resources Interview

Depending on the candidate’s location and availability, this interview can take place in the office itself or through a video call. It’s a 30-minute meeting carried out by one or two of our HR Analysts.

> Generally, it consists of a first part in which we explain a lot of things about Rootstrap, what we do, our history, how we work, the technologies we work with, growth and learning opportunities within the company, the work environment, etc. And then, it’s time to get to know them, we want to know about previous experiences, their attitude towards work, how they see themselves in the future, and what they are looking for in their next job, among other things. A pretty important aspect of this meeting, apart from evaluating their experience, is to assess their personality and see if the person would fit in within Rootstrap’s culture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generally, it consists of a first call in which we explain a lot of things about Rootstrap, what we do, our history, how we work, the technologies we work with, growth and learning opportunities within the company, the work environment, etc. And then, it’s time to get to know them, we want to know about their previous experiences, their attitude towards work, how they see themselves in the future, and what they are looking for in their next job, among other things. A pretty important aspect of this meeting, apart from evaluating their experience, is to assess their personality and see if the person would fit in within Rootstrap’s culture.
```

> Once this is complete, and if the candidate seems like a good fit, a technical interview will be set with one or two of our engineers depending on the technologies the person works with and the level of experience they have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once this is complete, and if the candidate seems like a good fit, a technical interview will be set with one or two of our engineers depending on the tech the person works with and the level of experience they have.
```

### Step 2: Technical Interview

> The technical interview is the longest of all steps (it usually takes about two hours). It’s an instance where our engineers have to assess the technological proficiency of the candidate, their reasoning and thinking process, as well as how the person seems to work in a team, what other tasks they carry out within a team context, and what they would contribute to the company in terms of culture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The technical interview is the longest of all steps (it usually takes about two hours). It’s where our engineers have to assess the technological proficiency of the candidate, their reasoning and thinking process, as well as how the person seems to work in a team,  and what they would contribute to the company in terms of culture.
```

There are mainly three different parts to this interview.

> First, we explain about what we do, our teams, how they are organized, internal teams, processes, and feedback instances. All of this from an engineering standpoint. We also want to answer any question they have about the work they’ll be doing and their place within the company. And we want to know about them, whether they are still studying, or about past job experiences, teams they’ve worked on, projects they’ve helped create, and what are their future expectations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we explain what we do, our teams,  internal teams, processes, and share feedback. We also want to answer any questions they have about the work they’ll be doing and their place within the company. We also want to know about them, whether they are still studying, or about past job experiences, teams they’ve worked on, projects they’ve helped create, and what are their future goals are. 
```

> Secondly, we spend some time making them technical questions. Some of these cover general programming subjects and the rest are specific to the technologies they work with. We also show them code snippets and discuss with them what is wrong with the code they are seeing, or how that code can be improved. With these, we aim to verify the level of knowledge they manage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Secondly, we spend some time asking them technical questions. Some of these questions are for general programming or for the specific skill set we are hiring them for. We also show code snippets and discuss with them what is wrong with the code they are seeing, and how that code can be improved.  Our goal is to verify the level of coding knowledge they possess. 
```

### Step 3: English Interview

This step is very important, because the great majority of our clients are English speakers, so it’s vital that we can all communicate fluently with them. However, in most cases this interview does not deter us from hiring the person. We provide on-site English classes for those people who may need more support once they become a part of the team.

We usually have a video call with the candidate which takes about 15-20 minutes. Depending on the level of English the candidate expressed to have, we take one of two approaches:

If the candidate has a basic level of English we have a simple conversation about general topics where we try to cover different subjects and grammatical structures.
On the other hand, if their level is higher, we play pretend and ask them to select a web page they would like to demo for us, pretending they are the ones that developed it.

We obviously check for grammatical correctness, sentence building, and vocabulary diversity, but we mostly try to see that the person is able to communicate their ideas effectively and is able to get their message across.

### Step 4: Final Interview

> The fourth and last step would be to have an interview with some of our engineering managers in order to meet the person before joining the company and explain to them about the area they are going to be working in. It’s also an excellent opportunity for them to ask any other questions they have before finishing the process, to greet them for joining RS, and to bring the process to a closure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fourth and last step would be to have an interview with some of our engineering managers in order to meet the candidate before officially joining the company. It’s also an excellent opportunity for them to ask any other questions they have before finishing the process, to connect with them individually, and to close the interview process.
```

> And that is how people have been joining the engineering team at Rootstrap in the last year. It’s the process we have had success with, but that doesn’t mean it’s the best. We are constantly evaluating it, modifying the things that are not working, and making improvements where we see fit to accommodate to an ambitious growing company with new challenges each day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that is how people have been joining the engineering team at Rootstrap in the last year. It’s the process we have had success with, but that doesn’t mean it’s the best. We are constantly evaluating it, modifying the things that are not working, and making improvements where we see fit to accommodate an ambitiously growing company with new challenges each day.
```
